Kobe Bean Bryant ( KOH-bee; August 23, 1978 – January 26, 2020) was an American professional basketball player. A shooting guard, he spent his 20-year career with the Los Angeles Lakers in the National Basketball Association. Bryant won five NBA championships and was an 18-time All-Star, four-time All-Star MVP, 15-time member of the All-NBA Team, 12-time member of the All-Defensive Team, the 2008 NBA Most Valuable Player (MVP), two-time NBA Finals MVP, and two-time scoring champion. He ranks fourth in league all-time regular season and postseason scoring. Bryant was posthumously named to the NBA 75th Anniversary Team in 2021 and was a two-time inductee to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, for his playing career in 2020 and as a member of the 2008 U.S. Olympic team in 2025.
The son of NBA player Joe Bryant, Bryant was born in Philadelphia and partly raised in Italy. Recognized as the top American high school basketball player while at Lower Merion High School in the Philadelphia suburb of Ardmore, Bryant declared for the 1996 NBA draft and was selected by the Charlotte Hornets with the 13th pick; he was then traded to the Lakers. As a rookie, Bryant earned a reputation as a high-flyer by winning the 1997 Slam Dunk Contest and was named an All-Star in his second season. He had a contentious relationship with teammate Shaquille O'Neal. Nevertheless, the pair led the Lakers to three consecutive NBA championships from 2000 to 2002. In 2003, Bryant was charged with sexual assault. Charges were dropped after the accuser refused to testify. A related lawsuit was settled out of court, with Bryant issuing an apology and admitting to a sexual encounter he maintained was consensual.
After the Lakers lost the 2004 NBA Finals, O'Neal was traded and Bryant became the franchise's cornerstone. He led the NBA in scoring in the 2005–06 and 2006–07 seasons. On January 22, 2006, Bryant scored a career-high 81 points, the third most in an NBA game behind Wilt Chamberlain's 100-point game and Bam Adebayo's 83-point game. Bryant led the team to championships in 2009 and 2010, and was named NBA Finals MVP both times. He continued among the league's premier players through the 2012–13 season when he suffered a torn achilles tendon. His remaining playing career was hampered by injuries and reduced playing time. Bryant retired after the 2015–16 season. In 2017, the Lakers retired both his jersey numbers: 8 and 24, making him the only NBA player to have multiple numbers retired by one franchise.
The Lakers' all-time leading scorer, Bryant was the NBA's first guard to play 20 seasons. His 18 All-Star designations are the third most ever, and his four NBA All-Star Game MVP Awards tied Bob Pettit's record. Bryant took the nickname Black Mamba in the mid-2000s, which became widely adopted by the public. He won gold medals on the 2008 and 2012 U.S. Olympic teams. In 2018, Bryant won the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film for Dear Basketball (2017), becoming the only person to win both an Olympic gold medal and an Oscar.
In January 2020, Bryant and his 13-year-old daughter Gianna were among nine people killed in a helicopter crash in Calabasas, California. Tributes and memorials followed, and the NBA All-Star Game MVP was renamed in his honor.

Early life
Kobe Bean Bryant was born on August 23, 1978, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. His mother, Pam Bryant (née Cox), is the sister of basketball player Chubby Cox, and his father, Joe Bryant, played eight seasons in the National Basketball Association (NBA). He has two older sisters: Sharia and Shaya. His father named him after the Kobe beef from Japan, which he saw on a restaurant menu, whereas his middle name, Bean, was derived from his father's nickname "Jellybean". Bryant's family was Catholic and he was brought up with this faith.
Bryant started playing basketball at the age of three, and the Lakers were his favorite team when he was growing up. When Bryant was six, his father retired from the NBA and moved his family to Rieti in Italy to continue playing professional basketball. After two years, they moved first to Reggio Calabria, then to Pistoia and Reggio Emilia. Bryant became accustomed to his new lifestyle and learned to speak fluent Italian. He was especially fond of Reggio Emilia, which Bryant considered a loving place and where some of his best childhood memories were made. Bryant began to play basketball seriously while living in Reggio Emilia. His grandfather mailed him videos of NBA games for him to study. Another source of inspiration was animated European films about sports, from which Bryant learned more about basketball. From 1987 to 1989, his father played for Olimpia Basket Pistoia where he paired with former Detroit Pistons player Leon Douglas. Bryant worked at the games as a ball and mop boy and practiced shooting at halftime. Douglas said, "At every one of our games at halftime, it was the Kobe show. He'd get out there and get his shot up. We'd come out of the locker room at halftime and have to chase him off the court".
Bryant also learned to play soccer, and his favorite soccer team was A.C. Milan. During summers, Bryant returned to the United States to play in a basketball summer league. When he was 13, Bryant and his family moved back to Philadelphia, where he enrolled in the eighth grade at Bala Cynwyd Middle School.

High school career
Bryant earned national recognition for his spectacular play at Lower Merion High School in Ardmore, located in the Philadelphia suburb of Lower Merion. He played on the varsity team as a freshman. Bryant became the first freshman in decades to start for Lower Merion's varsity team, but the team finished with a 4–20 record. The following three years, the Aces compiled a 77–13 record, with Bryant playing all five positions. During his junior year, Bryant averaged 31.1 points, 10.4 rebounds, 5.2 assists, 3.8 blocks and 2.3 steals and was named Pennsylvania Player of the Year, achieving a fourth-team Parade All-American nomination, The universities of Duke, Michigan, North Carolina and Villanova were at the top of his list. However, after high schooler Kevin Garnett went in the first round of the 1995 NBA draft, Bryant began to consider going directly to the pros.
At Adidas ABCD Camp, Bryant earned the 1995 senior MVP award while playing alongside future NBA teammate Lamar Odom. While in high school, then 76ers coach John Lucas invited Bryant to work out and scrimmage with the team, where he played one-on-one with Jerry Stackhouse. As a senior, Bryant led the Aces to their first state championship in 53 years. During the run, he averaged 30.8 points, 12 rebounds, 6.5 assists, 4 steals, and 3.8 blocked shots in leading the Aces to a 31–3 record. Bryant finished his high-school career as Southeastern Pennsylvania's all-time leading scorer at 2,883 points, surpassing both Wilt Chamberlain and Lionel Simmons.
Bryant's awards as a senior. He was named Naismith High School Player of the Year, Gatorade Men's National Basketball Player of the Year, a McDonald's All-American, a first-team Parade All-American and a USA Today All-USA First Team player. Bryant's coach, Greg Downer, commented that he was "a complete player who dominates" and praised his work ethic, even as the team's top player. In 1996, Bryant took R&B singer Brandy to her Hollywood High senior prom. Ultimately, 17-year-old Bryant decided to go directly into the NBA, the sixth player to do so. His news was met with significant publicity at a time when prep-to-pro NBA players were rare (Kevin Garnett was the only other for 20 years). His skills and SAT score of 1080 would have ensured admission to any college, but he did not officially visit campuses. In 2012, Bryant was honored as one of the 35 Greatest McDonald's All-Americans for his high school play.

Professional career
1996 NBA draft
Before the 1996 NBA draft, Bryant worked out in Los Angeles, where he scrimmaged against former Lakers Larry Drew and Michael Cooper and, according to then-Laker general manager Jerry West, "marched over these people".
The Lakers were looking to trade their starting center Vlade Divac to free up salary cap space to make an offer to free-agent center Shaquille O'Neal. The Hornets agreed to trade their No. 13 pick to the Lakers the day before the draft. Before agreement, the Hornets never considered drafting Bryant. During the draft, the Lakers told the Hornets whom to select minutes before the pick was made. Bryant was the first guard drafted out of high school. After the draft, the trade was put in jeopardy when Divac threatened to retire rather than be traded from LA. However, Divac relented and the trade was finalised on July 9, when the league's off-season moratorium ended. Since Bryant was a minor, his parents had to co-sign his $3.5 million three-year rookie contract.

Los Angeles Lakers (1996–2016)
Early years (1996–1999)
Bryant debuted in the Summer Pro League in Long Beach, California, scoring 25 points before a standing-room-only crowd. Defenders struggled to get in front of him. Bryant scored 36 points in the finale and finished with averages of 24.5 points and 5.3 rebounds. As a rookie in 1996–97, Bryant mostly came off the bench behind guards Eddie Jones and Nick Van Exel. He was the second-youngest player ever to play in an NBA game (18 years, 72 days) and became the youngest NBA starter (18 years, 158 days). Bryant played limited minutes, but as the season continued, his playing time grew.
In his first season, Bryant averaged 15.5 minutes of playing time. During the All-Star weekend, he participated in the Rookie Challenge and won the 1997 Slam Dunk Contest, the youngest dunk champion at age 18. Bryant's performance throughout the year earned him a spot on the NBA All-Rookie Second Team.
The Lakers advanced to the Western Conference semifinals in the playoffs against the Utah Jazz. Bryant was pressed into a lead role at the end of Game 5. Byron Scott missed the game with a sprained wrist, Robert Horry was ejected for fighting with Jeff Hornacek, and Shaquille O'Neal fouled out with 1:46 remaining. Bryant shot four air balls; the Jazz won 98–93 in overtime to eliminate the Lakers 4–1. He first missed a game-winning shot in the fourth quarter, then misfired three three-point field goals in overtime, including two tying shots in the final minute. O'Neal commented that "[Bryant] was the only guy who had the guts at the time to take shots like that."
In his second season, he received more playing time.  Bryant's scoring averages more than doubled, from 7.6 to 15.4. Playing time increased when the Lakers "played small", which positioned Bryant as a small forward alongside the guards he usually played behind. Bryant was runner-up for the NBA's Sixth Man of the Year Award, and through fan voting, became the NBA's youngest All-Star starter. Bryant was joined by teammates O'Neal, Van Exel, and Jones, making it the first time since 1983 that four players on one team were selected to play in an All-Star Game. Bryant's 15.4 points per game was the highest of any non-starter in the season.
The 1998–99 season marked Bryant's emergence as a premier guard. Bryant started every game for the lockout-shortened 50-game season. He signed a six-year $70 million contract extension, keeping him a Laker through 2003–04. Sportswriters compared his skills to Michael Jordan and Magic Johnson. The Lakers made the playoffs, where they were swept by the eventual champion San Antonio Spurs in the Western Conference Semifinals.

Three-peat (1999–2002)
Bryant's fortunes improved when Phil Jackson arrived in 1999. After years of steady improvement, Bryant became one of the premier shooting guards in the league, earning appearances in the league's All-NBA, All-Star, and All-Defense teams. The Lakers became championship contenders behind Bryant and O'Neal. Jackson applied his triangle offense (developed for the Bulls); this offense helped Bryant and O'Neal become elite.
Bryant was sidelined for six weeks prior to the start of the 1999–2000 season due to a preseason hand injury. When Bryant returned, he played over 38 minutes a game, he  increased in all statistical categories. This included leading the team in assists and steals per game. O'Neal and Bryant, backed with a strong bench, led the Lakers to win 67 games, tied for fifth-best. Bryant was named to the All-NBA Second Team and All-NBA Defensive Team for the first time (the youngest to receive All-Defensive honors). While playing second fiddle to O'Neal in the playoffs, Bryant had some clutch performances, including a 25-point, 11-rebound, seven-assist, four-block outingin Game 7 of the Western Conference Finals against the Portland Trail Blazers. He threw an alley-oop to O'Neal to clinch the game and series. In the 2000 Finals, against the Indiana Pacers, Bryant injured his ankle in Game 2 after landing on Jalen Rose's foot. Rose admitted he placed his foot under Bryant intentionally. Bryant did not return, and missed Game 3. In Game 4, Bryant scored 22 in the second half and led the team to victory as O'Neal fouled out. Bryant scored the winner to put the Lakers ahead 120–118. With a 116–111 victory in Game 6, the Lakers won their first championship since 1988.
Statistically, in the 2000–01 season Bryant increased his points per game to 28.5. Tensions between Bryant and O'Neal surfaced. Bryant led the team in assists, with five per game. However, the Lakers only won 56 games, an 11-game drop from the previous year. The team responded by going 15–1 in the playoffs. They swept the Portland Trail Blazers in the first round, and the Sacramento Kings in the semifinals. In Game 4 against the Kings, Bryant notched 48 points, 16 rebounds, and three assists in a 119–113 series-clinching victory. They swept the San Antonio Spurs in the Conference Finals, before losing their first game against the Philadelphia 76ers. The Lakers won the next four and their second championship. Bryant played heavy minutes lifting his game stats to 29.4 points, 7.3 rebounds, and 6.1 assists. O'Neal declared Bryant the best player in the league. Bryant ended up making the All-NBA Second Team and All-NBA Defensive Team again. He started the All-Star Game for the third year in a row (no game in 1999).
In the 2001–02 season, Bryant played 80 games for the first time. On January 14, 2002, Bryant recorded a then career-high 56 points, with five rebounds, in a 120–81 victory over the visiting Memphis Grizzlies. He averaged 25.2 points, 5.5 rebounds, and 5.5 assists. Bryant had a career-high 46.9% shooting percentage and led his team in assists. Bryant claimed his first All-Star MVP trophy after a 31-point performance in Philadelphia, where he was booed by fans throughout the game, stemming from his comment to a 76ers heckler during the Finals that the Lakers were "going to cut your hearts out." Making the All-NBA Defensive Team again, Bryant was named to the All-NBA First Team for the first time. The Lakers won 58 games that year and finished second in the Pacific Division behind the Sacramento Kings. Bryant was suspended for one game after he punched Reggie Miller of the Indiana Pacers after a March 1, 2002, victory.
The road to the Finals was much tougher than the record run of the previous year. While they swept the Blazers and defeated the Spurs 4–1 in the first two rounds, the Lakers did not have home-court advantage against the Sacramento Kings. The series stretched to seven games, the first time for the Lakers since the 2000 Western Conference Finals. However, the Lakers dominated and made their third consecutive NBA Finals, in which Bryant averaged 26.8 points, 51.4% shooting, 5.8 rebounds, 5.3 assists, scoring a quarter of the team's points. Aged 23, he became the youngest player to win three championships. Bryant was praised for his performance in fourth quarters, specifically the last two rounds.

Title defense and fourth Finals (2002–2004)
In the first game of the 2002–03 season, Bryant recorded 27 points, 10 rebounds, five assists, and four steals in an 87–82 loss to the visiting Spurs. On November 1, he recorded a triple-double of 33 points, 15 rebounds, and 12 assists in a 108–93 victory over the Clippers. Bryant broke an NBA record for three-pointers on January 7, 2003, when he made 12 against the Seattle SuperSonics. He averaged 30 points and embarked on a historic run, posting 40 or more points in nine consecutive games while averaging 40.6 in February. Bryant also averaged career-high 6.9 rebounds, 5.9 assists, and 2.2 steals. He was once again voted to both the All-NBA and All-Defensive First Teams, and came in third for the MVP award. After finishing 50–32 in the regular season, the Lakers floundered in the playoffs and lost in the semifinals in six games to the eventual champions San Antonio Spurs.
In 2003, Bryant was arrested for sexual assault ahead of the 2003–04 season. This caused him to miss some games due to court appearances. In the final game of the regular season, the Lakers played the Portland Trail Blazers. Bryant made two buzzer-beaters to win the game and the Pacific Division title. At the end of the fourth quarter, Bryant made a three-pointer with 1.1 seconds left to send it into overtime. The game went to a second overtime, in which Bryant made another three-pointer as time expired to narrowly lift the Lakers past the Blazers, 105–104. The Lakers advanced to the Finals, where they lost to the Detroit Pistons in five games. Bryant averaged 22.6 points and 4.4 assists while shooting 35.1%. Jackson's contract as coach was not renewed, and Rudy Tomjanovich took over. O'Neal was traded to the Miami Heat for Lamar Odom, Caron Butler, and Brian Grant.

Playoff miss (2004–2005)
In July 2004, Bryant signed a seven-year, $136.4 million contract. Bryant was closely scrutinized and criticized during the 2004–05 season. His reputation was damaged from the prior year's events. A particularly damaging salvo came when Jackson wrote The Last Season: A Team in Search of Its Soul. The book detailed the Lakers' tumultuous 2003–04 season and criticizes Bryant, calling him "un-coachable". Midway through the season, Tomjanovich resigned, citing health problems and exhaustion. The remainder of the Lakers' season fell to assistant coach Frank Hamblen. Bryant was the league's second-leading scorer at 27.6 points. The Lakers went 34–48 and missed the playoffs for the first time in a decade. The season dented his status, as Bryant did not make the NBA All-Defensive Team and made only the All-NBA Third Team. Bryant engaged in public feuds with Karl Malone and Ray Allen.

Scoring records (2005–2007)
Despite their differences, Jackson returned to coach the Lakers. Bryant endorsed the move, and they worked well together, returning the team to the playoffs. Bryant forged his finest statistical season. On December 20, 2005, Bryant scored 62 points in three quarters against the Dallas Mavericks. Entering the fourth quarter, he had outscored the Mavericks team 62–61, the only time a player had done this through three quarters since the introduction of the shot clock. When the Lakers faced the Miami Heat on January 16, 2006, Bryant and O'Neal made headlines by engaging in handshakes and hugs before the game, signifying a pause in their feud. A month later, at the 2006 NBA All-Star Game, the two were seen laughing together.
On January 22, 2006, Bryant scored a career-high 81 points in a 122–104 victory over the Toronto Raptors. In addition to breaking the Elgin Baylor franchise record of 71, Bryant's feat was the second-best  in NBA history, behind only Chamberlain. Bryant also became  the first player since 1964 to score 45 points or more in four consecutive games, joining Chamberlain and Baylor. For January, Bryant averaged 43.4 points per game, the eighth highest for a single month, behind only Chamberlain. After the 2005–06 season, Bryant  had set single-season franchise records for most 40-point games (27) and most points scored (2,832). He won the scoring title for the first time, averaging 35.4, the fifth player to average 35+ in a season. Bryant finished fourth in the voting for the 2006 MVP Award but received 22 first place votes—second only to winner Steve Nash.
Bryant changed his jersey number from 8 to 24 at the start of the 2006–07 season to match his first high-school number. Bryant said he had wanted 24 as a rookie, but it was George McCloud's. Bryant wore 143 at the Adidas ABCD camp and chose 8 by adding those digits. In the first playoff round, the Lakers reached a 3–1 lead over the Phoenix Suns, culminating with Bryant's overtime-forcing and game-winning shots in Game 4. Despite Bryant's 27.9 points per game, the Lakers fell to the Suns in seven games. After scoring 50 points on 20 of 35 shooting in a Game 6 loss, Bryant was criticized for taking only three shots in the second half of the 121–90 Game 7.
During the 2006–07 season, Bryant earned his second All-Star MVP trophy. During the season, Bryant became involved in several on-court incidents. On January 28, while attempting to draw contact on a potential game-winning jump shot, he hit San Antonio Spurs guard Manu Ginóbili in the face with his elbow. Bryant was suspended for the subsequent game against the New York Knicks. The reason given was that Bryant had performed an "unnatural motion" in swinging his arm. On March 6, he appeared to repeat the motion, this time striking Minnesota Timberwolves guard Marko Jarić. The NBA suspended him again. In his first game back on March 9, Bryant elbowed Kyle Korver in the face, which was later re-classified as a Type 1 flagrant foul.
On March 16, Bryant scored a season-high 65 points against the Blazers, ending a seven-game losing streak, his second-best scoring performance. The following game, Bryant recorded 50 points against the Timberwolves, after which he scored 60 points in a road win against the Memphis Grizzlies—becoming the second Laker to score three straight 50-plus point games, a feat not seen since Jordan in 1987. The only other Laker to do so was Baylor. The next day, in a game against the Hornets, Bryant scored 50 points, making him the second player to have four straight 50-point games (behind Chamberlain, who achieved it twice with streaks of five and seven). Bryant finished the year with a total of 10 50-plus point games, surpassed only by Chamberlain. Bryant won his second straight scoring title that season. Throughout 2006–07, Bryant's jersey became the top seller in the US and China. Journalists attributed improved sales to Bryant's new number, as well as his All-Star performance. In the 2007 NBA playoffs, the Lakers were stomped  in the first round by the Suns, 4–1.

MVP season and back-to-back championships (2007–2010)
In May 2007 Bryant stated his desire for Jerry West's return, but denied wanting to be traded otherwise. However, three days later, on Stephen A. Smith's radio program, Bryant expressed anger over a Lakers "insider" who claimed Bryant was responsible for Shaquille O'Neal's departure, and stated, "I want to be traded." Three hours later, Bryant stated in another interview that after talking with coach Jackson, he had backed off his trade request. Bryant was shown in an amateur video saying that center Andrew Bynum should have been traded for All-Star Jason Kidd.
On December 23, 2007, Bryant became the youngest player (29 years, 122 days) to reach 20,000 points, in a game against the New York Knicks, after scoring 39 points, 11 rebounds, and 8 assists. On March 28, Bryant scored a season-high 53 points and 10 rebounds in a loss to the Memphis Grizzlies.

Despite an injury to his shooting hand's pinkie, described as "a complete tear of the radial collateral ligament, an avulsion fracture, and a volar plate injury at the MCP joint" that occurred in a February 5, 2008 game, Bryant played all 82 games of the regular season instead of opting for surgery. Regarding his injury, Bryant stated, "I would prefer to delay any surgical procedure until after our Lakers season, and this summer's Olympic Games. But, this is an injury that myself [sic] and the Lakers' medical staff will just have to continue to monitor on a day-to-day basis."
Aided by the trade for All-Star Pau Gasol, Bryant led his team to a conference-leading 57–25 record. The Lakers swept the Denver Nuggets in the first round and on May 6, 2008, Bryant was the league MVP. He said, "It's been a long ride. I'm very proud to represent this organization, to represent this city." Bryant was the only unanimous selection to the All-NBA team, for the third straight and sixth time. Bryant headlined the NBA All-Defensive First Team with Kevin Garnett, receiving 52 points, including 24 first-place nods, his eighth selection.
In the first game of the next round, against the Utah Jazz, Bryant scored 38 points as the Lakers beat the Jazz in Game 1. The Lakers won the next game, but dropped Games 3 and 4, despite Bryant's 33.5 points per game. The Lakers then won the next two to win the semifinals. This set up a  berth against the Spurs. The Lakers won in five games, reaching the Finals against the Boston Celtics. This marked the fifth time in Bryant's career, and the first time without O'Neal, that the Lakers made the Finals. The Lakers lost in six.

In early September 2008, Bryant rejected surgery to repair his pinkie. Bryant led the team to tie the franchise record for most wins to start the season going 17–2, and by the middle of December they had a 21–3 record. He was again selected as an All-Star game starter. He was named Western Conference Player of the Month for December and January and Western Conference Player of the week three times. In a game against the Knicks on February 2, 2009, Bryant scored 61 points, setting a record for the most points scored at Madison Square Garden. During the 2009 NBA All-Star Game, Bryant shared the All-Star Game co-MVP with O'Neal. The Lakers had the best record in the West (65–17). Bryant was runner-up in the MVP voting behind James, and was again selected to the All-NBA First and All-Defensive First Teams.
In the playoffs, the Lakers defeated the Utah Jazz in five games, the Houston Rockets in seven, and the Denver Nuggets in six, the Lakers again made the NBA Finals. The Lakers defeated the Orlando Magic in five. Bryant was awarded his first NBA Finals MVP,averaging 32.4 points, 7.4 assists, 5.6 rebounds, 1.4 steals and 1.4 blocks. Bryant became the first player since West in the 1969 NBA Finals to average at least 32.4 points and 7.4 assists for a Finals series and the first since Jordan to average 30 points, five rebounds, and five assists for a championship team. Bryant was the league's leading scorer throughout the decade of the 2000s, accumulating 21,065 points in regular season play between the 1999-00 and 2008–09 seasons.

During the 2009–10 season, Bryant made six game-winning shots including a buzzer-beating, one-legged three-pointer over Dwyane Wade on December 4, 2009, beating the Heat 108–107. Bryant considered it one of his luckiest shots. A week later, Bryant suffered an avulsion fracture in his right index finger in a game against the Minnesota Timberwolves. Bryant continued playing. Five days later, Bryant made another game-winning shot, against the Milwaukee Bucks in overtime. Bryant became the youngest (31 years, 151 days) player to reach 25,000 points, surpassing Chamberlain. Bryant made another game-winning three-pointer against the Sacramento Kings, and the game-winning field goal against the Boston Celtics. The following day, Bryant surpassed West to become the Lakers' all-time leading scorer. After he was sidelined for five games by an ankle injury, which forced him to miss the 2010 NBA All-Star Game (he was the Western Conference's leading vote-getter), Bryant made his return and made another clutch three-pointer to give the Lakers a one-point lead with four seconds remaining against the Memphis Grizzlies. Two weeks later, he made his sixth game-winning shot of the season, against the Toronto Raptors.
On April 2, 2010, Bryant signed a three-year contract extension worth $87 million.  Bryant suffered injuries throughout the season costing him nine games. The Lakers defeated the Oklahoma City Thunder in the first round in six games. The Lakers swept the Utah Jazz in the second round and beat the Phoenix Suns in five games in the conference finals. In Game 2, Bryant finished with 13 assists, setting a new playoff career-high; it was the most by a Laker in the playoffs since Magic Johnson in 1996 (also 13). In the Finals, the Lakers won their second consecutive championship by beating the Boston Celtics in seven games. He finished the game with 15 rebounds, tying an NBA Finals record for a shooting guard shared by Sam Jones and Tom Gola. Bryant won his fifth championship and his second consecutive Finals MVP award. This was the first time the Lakers won a Finals game 7 against the Celtics. Bryant said this was the most satisfying of his five championships.

Post-championship struggles (2010–2013)
The Lakers started the 2010–11 season by winning their first eight. On January 30, 2011, against the Celtics, Bryant became the youngest player to reach 27,000 points. Two days later, he became one of seven with at least 25,000 points, 5,000 rebounds, and 5,000 assists. In Boston on February 10, Bryant led the team's 2nd half rally from a 15-point deficit for a 92–86 victory. It was the Lakers' first victory that season against one of the top four teams. For Bryant's 13th straight All-Star game, he was the leading vote-getter and won his fourth All-Star MVP, tying Bob Pettit's record. Bryant  rose from 12th to 6th on the career scoring list. Bryant finished the season averaging less than 20 shots a game, his fewest since 2003–04.
The NBA fined Bryant $100,000 for directing a gay slur at referee Bennie Adams in frustration. Bryant stated he was open to discussing the matter with gay rights groups and wanted to appeal his fine. Bryant and other Lakers appeared in a public service announcement denouncing his behavior. The Lakers were swept by the eventual champion Mavericks in the second round.

Ahead of the lockout-shortened 2011–12 season, Bryant received experimental platelet-rich plasma therapy called Orthokine in Germany to treat left knee and ankle pain. Bryant began the season with an injured wrist. On January 10, he scored 48, 40, 42, and 42 in consecutive games for the sixth time, chasing Chamberlain's 19 times. At the 2012 NBA All-Star Game, Bryant scored 27 to pass Jordan as the career scoring leader in All-Star Games. He suffered a broken nose and concussion after a hard foul from Dwyane Wade. Bryant sat out the season finale, falling 38 points short versus Kevin Durant in the race for the scoring title. Durant and Oklahoma City beat the Lakers in the second round, losing in five in Bryant's final postseason appearance.
In 2012–13, the Lakers acquired center Dwight Howard and point guard Steve Nash. On November 2, 2012, Bryant scored 40 with two steals, passing Magic Johnson (1,724) as the Lakers career leader in steals. However, the Lakers lost to the Clippers and started the season 0–3 for the first time in 34 years. After starting 1–4, coach Brown was replaced by Mike D'Antoni, whom Bryant knew as a child when D'Antoni was a star player in Italy. Bryant had grown close with D'Antoni during their time with Team USA. On December 5 against New Orleans, Bryant became the youngest player (34 years and 104 days) to score 30,000 points, joining Chamberlain, Jordan, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, and Karl Malone to reach that milestone. On December 18, in a 101–100 victory over the Charlotte Bobcats, Bryant scored 30+ points in a tenth consecutive game in a 104–87 victory over the Portland Trail Blazers, when he scored 27 points and sat out the fourth quarter. In a move to improve defense, D'Antoni had Bryant guard the opponent's best perimeter player; he was the primary defender on the Cavaliers' Kyrie Irving, holding him to 15 points. Bryant acknowledged he was a more focused defender with a challenging defensive assignment, as opposed to when he played off the ball against weaker players. His defense disrupted opponents and protected Nash from unfavorable matchups.

Bryant led the league in scoring through much of the first 42 games. With a disappointing 17–25 start to the season, D'Antoni made Bryant the primary facilitator on offense and moved Nash off the ball to become a spot-up shooter. In the next three games, Bryant had at least 10 assists in three wins with a three-game total of 39, his career best. Bryant missed a triple-double in each game with nine rebounds twice and eight in the other. In crucial March wins, he scored 40+ and had 10+ assists in back-to-back games, the first Laker since West. On February 22, Mavericks owner Mark Cuban suggested that the Lakers should waive Bryant via the amnesty clause of the collective bargaining agreement to save on luxury tax. The Lakers called the comment 'inappropriate', and Bryant responded by scoring 38 points in the Lakers' 103-99 road victory at Dallas on February 24, famously tweeting "Amnesty THAT" after the game. Bryant surpassed Chamberlain to become the fourth-leading scorer in league history in a March 30, 2013, victory.
With the Lakers fighting to secure the final playoff berth in the Western Conference, and overcome injuries on the team, Bryant began playing nearly all 48 minutes each game. On April 10, 2013, he became the first player in NBA history to get 47 points, eight rebounds, five assists, four blocks, and three steals in a game. Two days later, Bryant suffered a torn Achilles tendon against the Golden State Warriors, ending his season. Bryant's injury came while he was playing at least 40 minutes in seven consecutive games. The 34-year-old was averaging his most minutes (38.6) in six years, outdone only by Portland rookie Damian Lillard. Lakers general manager Mitch Kupchak had spoken to Bryant about his playing time, but Bryant insisted it needed to continue given the Lakers' playoff push. He had surgery on April 13 to repair the tear, likely missing 6-9 months of the next season. Bryant ended the season with customary averages of 27.3 points, 5.6 rebounds, and 6 assists per game on 46.3% shooting. However, The New York Times called his season "perhaps some of the finest work of his career". He reached 40 points eight times, and had 10+ assists11 times. Bryant was dubbed "Magic Mamba" to celebrate his passing skills. Bryant's assists were the second-highest of his career and his field goal percentage was its highest since 2008–09. The Lakers were swept by the San Antonio Spurs in the first round.

Injury-plagued years (2013–2015)
Bryant resumed practicing in November 2013, after the 2013–14 season had begun. On November 25, he signed an estimated $48.5 million, two-year contract extension. Bryant remained the league's highest-paid player, although he accepted a smaller deal; Bryant had been eligible to receive an extension starting at $32 million per year. His contract polarized fans, with detractors arguing that stars should take less money to allow their team more financial freedom, while supporters countered that stars were underpaid. Bryant resumed playing on December 8, scoring nine points, adding 8 assists and 4 rebounds, in a 106–94 home loss to the Toronto Raptors. Nine days later, he suffered a lateral tibial plateau fracture in his left knee. Bryant had notched six games since returning from his Achilles injury, including playing point guard after injuries to Nash, Steve Blake, and Jordan Farmar. Bryant was averaging 13.8 points, 6.3 assists, and 4.3 rebounds. Despite his injuries, he was voted by fans to start in his 16th All-Star game. He did not appear in the game or for the rest of the season, due to his knee. At the time, the team was 22–42 and tied for the worst record in the Western Conference. The Lakers finished 27–55 and missed the playoffs for the first time since 2005.
Bryant returned for the 2014–15 season, his 19th, coached by his former teammate, Byron Scott. On November 30, in a 129–122 overtime victory over the Toronto Raptors, Bryant recorded his 20th career triple-double with 31 points, 12 assists, and 11 rebounds. At 36, Bryant became the oldest NBA player to go 30/10/10. On December 14, he became the NBA's third all-time leading scorer, passing Jordan (32,292) in a 100–94 victory over Minnesota. Bryant played in the first 27 games, averaging team-highs with 26 points and 35 minutes while leading the league with 22+ shots. Scott then rested him for three games after one of his worst performances of the season, when Bryant committed nine turnovers and scored 25 points on just 8-for-30 shooting in a 108–101 loss to Sacramento. He was suffering from soreness in his knees, feet, back, and Achilles tendons. Scott planned to reduce Bryant's workload going forward as a result. Bryant had exceeded 40 minutes three times, and the coach blamed himself for overloading him after a great start to  the season. In his second game back, Bryant went 23/11/11 in a 111–103 victory over Denver, becoiming the third player to record multiple triple-doubles in a season at 36+. On January 21, Bryant suffered a rotator cuff tear in his right shoulder against the New Orleans Pelicans. The right-handed Bryant ran the offense while shooting, dribbling, and passing almost exclusively with his left hand. Prior to the injury, Bryant had rested in eight of 16 games. He underwent season-ending surgery, ending up with 22 points at a career-low 37%, well below his 45% career mark. Bryant was expected to be sidelined for nine months with a return targeted toward the start of the 2015–16 season. The Lakers finished the season at 21–61, worse than the previous, all-time bad year.

Final season and retirement (2015–2016)
After recovering to play in the 2015–16 preseason, Bryant suffered a calf injury and missed the final two weeks of exhibition games. He played in the season opener, thereby surpassing John Stockton's league record of 19 for the most seasons with the same team. 
On November 29, 2015, Bryant announced via The Players' Tribune that he would retire at the end of the season. In his poem titled "Dear Basketball", Bryant wrote that he fell in love with the game at age six.

In a letter distributed to Lakers' fans, Bryant wrote: "What you've done for me is far greater than anything I've done for you. ... My love for this city, this team and for each of you will never fade. Thank you for this incredible journey."
At the time of his announcement, Bryant was second on the team in minutes (30.8) behind Jordan Clarkson and leading the team with 16.7 field goal attempts per game, while averaging just 15.7 points and shooting a career-low 31.5 percent. Bryant's free throw attempts had dropped from his career average, and his game had become over-reliant on pump fakes and long-range shots, making a league-worst 19.5 percent from three-point range while attempting seven a game, almost double his career average. 
Bryant requested that opposing teams on the road not hold any on-court ceremonies in his honor or present him any gifts in public. Prior to announcing his retirement, Bryant had been steadfast about not wanting the fuss of a staged farewell tour, preferring boos to cheers. However, Bryant was still honored around the league with video tributes and fan ovations, including arenas that historically jeered him. Bryant had always been was respected but not beloved, so he was astonished by the cheers.

In a 119–115 victory over the Timberwolves, he made seven three-pointers and scored 38, including 14 of the team's 18 in the last 5:02 of the game, . The win ended a 10-game losing streak, avoiding becoming the Lakers' longest losing streak. He became the fourth 37+ player to log at least 35/5/5. Bryant was the leading vote-getter for the 2016 All-Star Game with 1.9 million votes, beating Stephen Curry's 1.6 million. After moving to small forward that season, Bryant was a frontcourt starter for the first time. West teammates offered to feed him the ball in an attempt to get him another All-Star MVP, but Bryant declined.
The Lakers beat the Jazz 101–96 in his final game. Bryant scored an NBA season-high 60 points on 50 shots—the most shots in the prior 30 seasons—and outscoring the Jazz by himself 23–21 in the fourth quarter. He also set the record for the most points in a final regular season game. He was the first player his age to score 60+ at 37 years and 234 days. The Lakers finished the season at 17–65, the worst in Lakers' history. After the game, he gave a speech to the Staples Center crowd.

I can't believe how fast 20 years went by. [...] To be standing [on the] center court with you guys, my teammates behind me, appreciating the journey that we've been on — we've been through our ups [and] downs. I think the most important part is we all stayed together throughout. [...] Thank you guys for all the years of support. Thank you guys for all the motivation. Thank you for all the inspiration. What can I say? Mamba out.

National team career
Bryant declined to play in the 2000 Olympics because he was getting married. Bryant also decided not to play in the 2002 FIBA World Championship. He was originally selected for the FIBA Americas Championship in 2003, but withdrew after arthroscopic shoulder and knee surgeries. The following summer, Bryant had to withdraw from the Olympic team because of his sexual assault case. Bryant was named to the 2006–2008 U.S. preliminary roster, but knee surgery sidelined him from the 2006 FIBA World Championship.
Bryant's United States national team career began in 2007. He was a member of the 2007 USA Men's Senior National Team and USA FIBA Americas Championship Team that finished 10–0, won gold and qualified the United States men for the 2008 Olympics. Bryant started in all 10. He averaged 15.3/2.9/2.0 with 1.6 steals.

On June 23, 2008, Bryant was named to the USA Men's Senior National Team for the 2008 Summer Olympics, his first trip to the Olympics. Bryant scored 20, along with six assists, as Team USA defeated Spain 118–107 in the gold medal game on August 24, for its first gold medal in a worldwide competition since the 2000 Olympics. He averaged 15.0/2.8/2.1, shooting .462 in the eight Olympic contests.
Bryant rejoined the national team for the 2012 Summer Olympics. After winning another gold medal, he decided to retire from the team. Bryant finished his national team career with a 26–0 record, winning a gold medal each time.

Player profile
Bryant was a shooting guard. He was listed at 6 feet 6 inches (1.98 m) and 212 pounds (96 kg), Bryant was often cited as one of the NBA's most dangerous scorers. He drew frequent comparisons to Jordan, after whom Bryant modeled his playing. Like Jordan, Bryant became most known for his fall-away jump shot. Chris Ballard of Sports Illustrated described another of Bryant's moves as the "jab step-and-pause" in which Bryant jabbed his non-pivot foot forward to let the defender relax but instead of bringing the jab foot back, Bryant pushed off of it and drove around his opponent to reach the basket. Bryant learned post moves through individual coaching sessions from Hakeem Olajuwon.
Bryant established a reputation for his shots in the closing moments of tight games, even when double or triple-teamed, and was noted as one of the premier closers. In a 2012 annual survey of NBA general managers, Bryant was selected for the 10th consecutive season as the player general managers would want to take a clutch shot with a game on the line. Bryant enjoyed being the villain, and reveled in silencing a hostile crowd with his play. Bryant's willingness to take difficult shots drew criticism. Throughout his career, Bryant was disparaged as a selfish, high-volume shooter; he missed more shots than any other player LeBron James passed nim in 2024. Phil Jackson stated that Bryant "tends to force the action, especially when the game isn't going his way. When his shot is off, Kobe will pound away relentlessly until his luck turns." According to Bryant, "I would go 0 for 30 before I would go 0 for 9; 0 for 9 means you beat yourself, you psyched yourself out of the game."
In addition to his offense, Bryant also established himself as a standout defensive player. Bryant rarely drew charges when he played defense, which he believed spared his body and contributed to his longevity. However, some critics have suggested that Bryant's defensive accolades in his later years were based more on his reputation than his play.
Bryant was lauded for his work ethic, dubbed the "Mamba mentality". Throughout his first 17 seasons, Bryant's body was resilient, and he exhibited a high pain threshold while playing through injuries.Bryant made opponents and teammates alike the objects of his scorn. Many players considered him difficult to play with because of his high level of commitment and performance. According to sportswriter Mark Heisler of Forbes, "circa 2004–2007, Kobe was the most alienated superstar the NBA had ever seen." After O'Neal's departure, he led the Lakers to two NBA championships; during this period, Bryant became more of a mentor to his teammates than before. Jackson noted that in his earlier years, if Bryant talked to teammates it was usually "give me the damn ball". During the latter period, Bryant "embraced the team and his teammates, calling them up when we were on the road and inviting them out to dinner. It was as if the other players were now his partners, not his personal spear-carriers."

NBA career statistics
Regular season
Playoffs
Off the court
Personal life
Bryant was the youngest of three children. He grew up with two older sisters, Sharia and Shaya, and stayed close with them. Through Sharia, he was the uncle of football player Jett Washington.
In November 1999, 21-year-old Bryant met 17-year-old Vanessa Laine while she was working as a background dancer on the Tha Eastsidaz music video "G'd Up". Bryant was there and working on his debut album. They began dating and became engaged six months later in May 2000, while Laine was still a senior at Marina High School in Huntington Beach, California. To avoid media scrutiny, she finished high school through independent study. According to Vanessa's cousin Laila Laine, they had no prenuptial agreement. Laila said Bryant "loved her too much for one". They married on April 18, 2001, at St. Edward the Confessor Catholic Church in Dana Point, California. The wedding was not attended by Bryant's parents, his two sisters, his longtime advisor and agent Arn Tellem, or his Lakers teammates. Bryant's parents were opposed to the marriage, reportedly, because he was so young, and she was not African-American. This disagreement resulted in an estrangement of over two years, which ended when the couple's first daughter was born in January 2003.
Due to an ectopic pregnancy, Vanessa suffered a miscarriage in the spring of 2005. Their second daughter, Gianna Maria-Onore (also referred to as "Gigi"), was born in May 2006. On December 16, 2011, Vanessa Bryant filed for divorce, citing irreconcilable differences. The couple requested joint custody of their daughters. On January 11, 2013, Bryant and his wife announced that they had called off their divorce. In early December 2016, Vanessa gave birth to their third daughter, and in January 2019, the Bryants announced they were expecting a fourth daughter, who was born in June 2019.
Bryant was a practicing Catholic. He said his faith and a priest helped him through difficult times, such as the period following his rape accusation. A Catholic cantor said that she was inspired by Bryant's faith, and the respect that he showed her. Bryant and his family were regular attendees at Our Lady Queen of Angels Catholic Church in Newport Beach. He and daughter Gianna received the Eucharist together just hours before they died.
Bryant was multilingual. He was fluent in English, Italian, and Spanish. Inspired by the codename for Uma Thurman's character in the Kill Bill films, Bryant assigned himself the nickname of "Black Mamba", citing a desire for his basketball skills to mimic the eponymous snake's ability to "strike with 99% accuracy at maximum speed, in rapid succession". During the 2012–13 season, Bryant began referring to himself as "vino" to describe how his play had been aging like a fine wine.
In 2013, Bryant had a legal disagreement with an auction house over memorabilia from his early years that his parents had put up for auction. Bryant's parents received $450,000 from the auction house for the items, and contended Bryant had given them the rights to the items he had remaining in their home. However, Bryant's lawyers asked the auction house to return the items. Before the scheduled trial, a settlement was reached allowing the auction house the sale of fewer than 10% of the items. Bryant's parents apologized to him for the misunderstanding in a written statement, and appreciated the financial support he had given them over the years.
Bryant grew up a baseball fan and was a supporter of the Los Angeles Dodgers and Los Angeles Angels during his tenure with the Lakers. However, during the 2009 National League Championship Series when the Dodgers played his hometown Philadelphia Phillies, Bryant revealed to Craig Sager that he actually grew up a fan of their National League East archrivals, the New York Mets, wanting to be like Darryl Strawberry and boasted that he still had a Ron Darling baseball card.
Bryant was a lifelong fan of his hometown NFL team, the Philadelphia Eagles. Bryant was also a fan of soccer teams Barcelona, AC Milan, and Manchester City.
According to Forbes, at the time of his retirement, Bryant's $680 million in career earnings was the most ever by a team athlete during their playing career.
Bryant was a second cousin of his former Lakers teammate Cedric Ceballos.

Sexual assault case
In the summer of 2003, the sheriff's office of Eagle, Colorado, arrested Bryant in with a sexual assault complaint filed by a 19-year-old hotel employee. Bryant was there for knee surgery. The accuser stated that Bryant raped her in his hotel room the night before the procedure. Bryant admitted to an adulterous sexual encounter with his accuser, but denied her sexual assault allegation. Bryant was charged on July 18, 2003.
The accusation damaged Bryant's reputation, and the public's perception of him plummeted; McDonald's and Nutella terminated endorsement contracts. Sales for Bryant's replica jersey fell. In September 2004, the assault case was dropped by prosecutors after the accuser decided not to testify. Bryant agreed to apologize to her for the incident, including a public mea culpa: "Although I truly believe this encounter between us was consensual, I recognize now that she did not and does not view this incident the same way I did. After months of reviewing discovery, listening to her attorney, and even her testimony in person, I now understand how she feels that she did not consent to this encounter." The accuser filed a separate lawsuit against Bryant, which the two sides settled privately.

Endorsements
Before starting the 1996–97 season, Bryant signed a six-year contract with Adidas worth approximately $48 million. His first signature shoe was the Equipment KB 8. Bryant's other, earlier endorsements included deals with The Coca-Cola Company to endorse Sprite, McDonald's, promoting Spalding's NBA Infusion Ball, Upper Deck, Ferrero SpA's brand Nutella, Russell Corporation, and appearing in Kobe-themed video games by Nintendo. He lost many contracts over the rape allegations. A notable exception was Nike, Inc., who had just signed Bryant to a five-year, $40–45 million contract. They did not use his image or market his new shoe for the year, but resumed two years later, when his image had recovered. Bryant then scored endorsement deals with The Coca-Cola Company's susbidiary Energy Brands, to promote Vitamin Water. He was the cover athlete for NBA '07: Featuring the Life Vol. 2 and appeared in commercials for Guitar Hero World Tour in 2008 and Call of Duty: Black Ops in 2010.
In a 2008 video promoting Nike's Hyperdunk shoes, Bryant appears to jump over a speeding Aston Martin. The stunt was considered fake, and the Los Angeles Times said a real stunt would probably violate Bryant's Lakers contract. Nike then released the fourth edition of his signature shoe, Zoom Kobe IV. In 2010, Nike launched Nike Zoom Kobe V. In 2009, Bryant signed a deal with Nubeo to market the Black Mamba Collection, sports/luxury watches ranging from $25,000 to $285,000. On February 9, 2009, he was featured on the cover of ESPN The Magazine. CNN estimated Bryant's endorsement deals in 2007 to be worth $16 million a year. In 2010, he ranked third, behind Tiger Woods and Jordan, in Forbes' list of the world's highest-paid athletes, with $48 million.

On December 13, 2010, Bryant signed a two-year endorsement deal with Turkey's national airline, Turkish Airlines. In 2013, Forbes ranked Bryant the fifth-highest-paid sports star behind Floyd Mayweather, Cristiano Ronaldo, LeBron James, and Lionel Messi.
Bryant appeared as the cover athlete for many video games:

Kobe Bryant in NBA Courtside
NBA Courtside 2: Featuring Kobe Bryant
NBA Courtside 2002
NBA 3 on 3 Featuring Kobe Bryant
NBA '07: Featuring the Life Vol. 2
NBA 09: The Inside
NBA 2K10
NBA 2K17 (Legend Edition; Legend Edition Gold)
NBA 2K21 (Mamba Forever Edition)
NBA 2K24 (Kobe Bryant Edition and Black Mamba Edition)
Bryant was one of the global ambassadors of the 2019 FIBA Basketball World Cup in China.

Music
In high school, Bryant was a member of a rap group called CHEIZAW, named after the Chi Sah gang in the martial arts film Kid with the Golden Arm. The group was signed by Sony Entertainment, but the company wanted to have Bryant record on his own, to capitalize on Bryant's fame. He performed at a 1997 concert by Sway & King Tech and recorded a verse for a remix of Brian McKnight's "Hold Me".  Bryant appeared on O'Neal's Respect, starting the track "3 X's Dope", though Bryant was not creditieed. His only credited appearance on the Billboard Hot 100 was as a featured rapper on Brian McKnight and Tone's single "Hold Me", which was released in 1998 and peaked at number 35 in January 1999.
Sony pushed Bryant from underground hip hop into a more radio-friendly sound. His debut album, Visions, was scheduled to release in the spring of 2000. The first single, "K.O.B.E'", featured supermodel Tyra Banks singing the hook. The single debuted in January 2000, and was performed at NBA All-Star Weekend that month, but it was not well received. Sony abandoned plans for the album, which was never released, and dropped Bryant later that year. Bryant co-founded an independent record label, Heads High Entertainment, but it folded within a year. In 1999, he appeared on a remix of "Say My Name" by Destiny's Child on their Maxi single.
In 2011, Bryant was featured in Taiwanese singer Jay Chou's single "The Heaven and Earth Challenge" (天地一鬥, pronounced "Tian Di Yi Dou"). The proceeds for downloads of the single and ringtones were donated to impoverished schools for basketball facilities and equipment. The music video also features Bryant. The song was used by Sprite in its 2011 marketing campaign in China.
In 2009, American rapper Lil Wayne released a song called "Kobe Bryant". Similarly, in 2010, American rapper Sho Baraka released a song called "Kobe Bryant On'em", which was featured on his album Lions and Liars. In 2012, American rapper Chief Keef released "Kobe", a tribute song. It was featured on his album, Finally Rich, as a part of the deluxe edition. For the NBA 2K21 soundtrack, Damian Lillard, under his stage name Dame D.O.L.L.A., released a tribute track titled "Kobe", featuring Snoop Dogg and Derrick Milano.

Film and television
Bryant made his acting debut in 1996, appearing in an episode of Moesha. Bryant had met the show's star, Brandy, earlier in the year at a Nike All-Star basketball game; a couple of months later, in May 1996, he was Brandy's date to her Hollywood High School senior prom. That year, Bryant guest starred as himself on an episode of Arli$$ (episode: "What About the Fans?") and Sister, Sister (episode: "Kid-Napped"). In 1997, Bryant appeared on an episode of Hang Time, followed by a guest appearance on the Nickelodeon sketch comedy series All That (1998). He was also the first choice for the role of Jesus Shuttlesworth in Spike Lee's 1998 film He Got Game, but withdrew, saying "this summer is too big for me."
Bryant was the subject of Spike Lee's 2009 documentary film Kobe Doin' Work, which chronicled Bryant during the 2007–08 NBA season.
In 2018, Bryant became the first African-American to win the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film, and the first former professional athlete to be nominated for and win an Academy Award in any category, for his film Dear Basketball. Despite winning the Oscar, he was denied membership into the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences due to his lack of a larger body of work. The film also won the Annie Award for Best Animated Short Subject and a Sports Emmy Award. The film was produced by Bryant's production company, Granity Studios. In addition to future animation projects, Bryant was in talks with animator veteran Bruce Smith six months before his death about starting his own animation studio.
Beginning in 2018, Bryant wrote, produced and hosted the television series Detail, which aired for multiple seasons on ESPN and ESPN+. It featured his basketball insights and in-depth analyses of games and players. Bryant also appeared on MTV's Ridiculousness in 2019.

Filmography
Philanthropy
Bryant was the official ambassador for After-School All-Stars (ASAS), an American non-profit organization that provides comprehensive after-school programs to children in 13 US cities. Bryant started the Kobe Bryant China Fund which partnered with the Soong Ching Ling Foundation, a charity backed by the Chinese government. The Kobe Bryant China Fund raises money within China earmarked for education and health programs. On November 4, 2010, Bryant appeared alongside Zach Braff at the Call of Duty: Black Ops launch event at the Santa Monica Airport, where they presented a $1 million check to the Call of Duty Endowment, an Activision-founded nonprofit organization that helps veterans transition to civilian careers after leaving the military.
Bryant and his wife founded the Kobe and Vanessa Bryant Family Foundation (KVBFF). Its goals are "helping young people in need, encouraging the development of physical and social skills through sports and assisting the homeless." Bryant stated that the homeless faced injustice and blame for their situation.
Bryant and his wife were founding donors of the National Museum of African American History and Culture. Bryant donated the uniform that he wore in the 2008 NBA Finals, the year Bryant was named league MVP. Bryant granted over 200 requests for the Make-A-Wish Foundation.

Business ventures
Bryant established Kobe Inc. to own and grow brands in the sports industry. His initial investment was a 10% stake in the Bodyarmor SuperDrink company for $6 million in March 2014. The Coca-Cola Company purchased a minority stake in the company in August 2018, increasing Bryant's share to approximately $200 million.
In 2013, Bryant launched a production company called Granity Studios, which developed media, ranging from films to television shows and novels.
On August 22, 2016, Bryant and his business partner Jeff Stibel launched Bryant-Stibel, a venture capital firm focused on media, data, gaming, and technology, with $100 million in funding. In 2018, Bryant and Sports Academy launched Mamba Sports Academy, a joint athletic-training business venture. The academy established locations in Thousand Oaks and Redondo Beach, California.

Books
On October 23, 2018, Bryant's book The Mamba Mentality: How I Play, with photographs and afterword by Andrew D. Bernstein, an introduction by Phil Jackson and a foreword by Pau Gasol, was published. The book looks back on his career.
At the time of his death, Bryant was working with Brazilian author Paulo Coelho on a children's book aimed at inspiring underprivileged children. After Bryant's death, Coelho deleted the draft, saying in an interview that "it didn't make any sense to publish without him." He did not say how many pages had been en or whether the book had a title.
Bryant also co-wrote/produced young adult novels through Granity Studios: The Wizenard Series: Training Camp, Legacy and the Queen, and Epoca: The Tree of Ecrof. A fourth novel, The Wizenard Series: Season One, was released posthumously in March 2020. The Wizarenard Series: Season One topped the New York Times middle-grade hardcover list.

Death
Accident
At 9:06 a.m. Pacific Standard Time on January 26, 2020, a Sikorsky S-76 helicopter departed from John Wayne Airport in Orange County, California, with nine people aboard: Bryant, his 13-year-old daughter Gianna, six family friends including John Altobelli, and the pilot, Ara Zobayan. The helicopter was registered to the Fillmore-based Island Express Holding Corp., according to the California Secretary of State business database. The group was traveling to Camarillo Airport in Ventura County for a basketball game at Mamba Sports Academy in Thousand Oaks.
Due to light rain and fog that morning, Los Angeles Police Department helicopters and most other air traffic were grounded. The flight tracker showed that the helicopter circled above Glendale, California, due to heavy air traffic in the area. At 9:30 a.m., Zobayan contacted the control tower at Hollywood Burbank Airport, and was told he was flying too low to be tracked by radar. Amidst very heavy fog, the helicopter turned south towards the mountains. At 9:40 a.m., the helicopter climbed rapidly from 1,200 to 2,000 feet (370 to 610 m), flying at 161 knots (298 km/h; 185 mph).
At 9:45 a.m., the helicopter crashed into the side of a mountain in Calabasas, about 30 miles (48 km) northwest of downtown Los Angeles, and began burning. Bryant, his daughter, and the other seven occupants were all killed on impact. Initial reports indicated that the helicopter crashed in the hills above Calabasas in heavy fog. Witnesses reported hearing a helicopter struggling before crashing.

Investigations
On January 28, Bryant's identity was officially confirmed using fingerprints. The following day, the Los Angeles County Department of Medical Examiner-Coroner stated that the official cause of death for him and the eight others on the helicopter was blunt force trauma.
The Federal Aviation Administration, National Transportation Safety Board, and the FBI launched investigations into the crash.
The cause of the crash was hard to investigate, as the helicopter was not equipped with a black box. Over a year after the crash, on February 9, 2021, the NTSB declared that pilot Ara Zobayan probably became disoriented after flying into thick clouds. The five board members said Zobayan, who also died in the crash, ignored his training and violated federal regulations during the 40-minute flight.
On February 28, 2023, Vanessa Bryant was awarded a $28.85 million settlement from Los Angeles County to conclude legal proceedings over graphic photos of the aftermath of the helicopter crash that were shared without the permission of the family. The figure includes the $15 million she was awarded from L.A. County in a 2022 civil trial, with "additional funds to settle potential claims from her daughters"—Natalia, 20, Bianka, 6, and Capri, 3. Chris Chester, a co-plaintiff who lost his 45-year-old wife and 13-year-old daughter in the crash, settled for $19.95 million.

Tributes and funeral services
On February 7, Bryant and his daughter were buried in a private funeral in Pacific View Memorial Park in the Corona del Mar neighborhood of Newport Beach, California. A public memorial service was held on February 24 (2/24, marking both Kobe's and Gianna's jersey numbers) at Staples Center (later Crypto.com Arena) with Jimmy Kimmel hosting. Speakers at the service included Vanessa, Jordan, and O'Neal, along with Phoenix Mercury guard Diana Taurasi and Geno Auriemma, Taurasi's coach at Connecticut, where Gianna had been aspiring to play.

The NBA had postponed the Lakers' game against the Clippers just two days after the accident on January 28—the first time an NBA game was postponed for any reason since the 2013 Boston Marathon bombing led to the postponement of a Celtics game. On January 30, the first game at Staples Center after the crash was played between the Clippers and the Sacramento Kings; the Clippers honored Bryant before the game, with Southern California native Paul George narrating a video tribute to Bryant. The next day, the Lakers played their first game after the crash against the Trail Blazers. Ahead of the game, the Lakers paid tribute to Bryant and all who lost their lives in the crash with a ceremony held just before tip-off, with Usher singing "Amazing Grace" and Boyz II Men singing the national anthem, while Wiz Khalifa and Charlie Puth reunited to perform "See You Again"—originally their tribute to Paul Walker after his death while filming Furious 7—at halftime. James also delivered a speech to the crowd before the game, and every player in the Lakers starting lineup was announced with Bryant's name. The game was the second-most-watched in ESPN history, averaging 4.41 million viewers. The first ever head-to-head meeting between Shaquille O'Neal and Yao Ming in 2003 was the only one with more viewers.
Also, beginning with the Spurs and the Raptors in their game in San Antonio on the day of the crash, teams paid tribute to Bryant at the start of their games with intentional on-court violations referring to his uniform numbers on their first possession—either a 24-second shot clock or an 8-second backcourt violation. On February 15, NBA commissioner Adam Silver announced that the All-Star Game MVP Award would be renamed to the NBA All-Star Game Kobe Bryant Most Valuable Player Award in Bryant's honor. In May 2020, the Mamba Sports Academy was renamed to Sports Academy out of respect for Bryant.
The 62nd Annual Grammy Awards went ahead as scheduled at Staples Center on the day of the crash, but included tributes by multiple artists and groups, including host Alicia Keys opening the show with a tribute speech in which she called Staples Center "the house that Kobe Bryant built" and joining Boyz II Men to sing "It's So Hard to Say Goodbye to Yesterday".
Bryant also appeared at the start of the In Memoriam segment of the 92nd Academy Awards following his Oscar in 2018 for Dear Basketball, and Spike Lee wore a suit in tribute to him at the ceremony. He was not included in the montages at the 2020 VMAs and Emmys, held later in the year. Fans were upset at the omission, especially as actors Naya Rivera and Chadwick Boseman had been featured prominently in both; after Rivera and Boseman's unexpected deaths in July and August 2020 respectively, the three young black celebrities were popularly compared.
The 2020 Pro Bowl was also played at Camping World Stadium in Orlando on the day of the crash, and before kickoff, NFC players who learned of Bryant's death conducted a prayer led by Seattle Seahawks quarterback Russell Wilson, while various on-field and PA tributes were made during the game.
In the 2020 WNBA draft, Gianna Bryant, Alyssa Altobelli, and Payton Chester were made honorary draft picks.
After the Lakers beat the Miami Heat in Game 6 of the 2020 NBA Finals to clinch the franchise's 17th NBA championship, rapper, Lakers fan and Long Beach native Snoop Dogg paid homage to Bryant and the Lakers with a full forearm tattoo. Bryant was posthumously inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame in 2021, with Vanessa delivering the acceptance speech on Bryant's behalf.

Legacy
Bryant was called "one of the greatest players in the history of our game" by NBA commissioner Adam Silver, and The New York Times wrote that Bryant had "one of the most decorated careers in the history of the sport." Reuters called him "arguably the best player of his generation", while both Sporting News and TNT named him their NBA player of the decade for the 2000s. In 2008 and again in 2016, ESPN ranked Bryant the second-greatest shooting guard of all time after Jordan. In 2022, to commemorate the NBA's 75th Anniversary, The Athletic ranked their top 75 players of all time, and they named Bryant as the 10th-greatest player in NBA history and the second-highest shooting guard on the list, behind only Jordan. Many peer players—including Kevin Durant, Dirk Nowitzki, Dwyane Wade, and Derrick Rose—called Bryant their generation's version of Jordan. The Press-Enterprise described Bryant as "maybe the greatest Laker in the organization's history." He was the Lakers' all-time leading scorer, and his five titles are tied for the most in Lakers' history. Both numbers Bryant wore during his career, 8 and 24, were retired by the Lakers on December 18, 2017. In his first year of eligibility, Bryant was named a finalist for the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, weeks after his death, before being elected a couple of months later in April 2020. His formal induction was delayed until 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In October 2021, Bryant was honored as one of the league's greatest players of all time by being named to the NBA 75th Anniversary Team. The team was honored during the 2022 NBA All-Star Game in Cleveland, with Bryant receiving one of the loudest cheers of the night.
With career averages of 25.0 points, 5.2 rebounds, 4.7 assists, and 1.4 steals per game, Bryant was considered one of the most complete players in NBA history. He is the fourth-leading scorer in league history with 33,643 points. Bryant was the first player in NBA history to have at least 30,000 career points and 6,000 career assists, and was one of only four players with 25,000 points, 6,000 rebounds, and 6,000 assists. He led the NBA in scoring during the 2005–06 and 2006–07 seasons. Bryant's 81-point performance against Toronto in 2006 is the second-highest in NBA history, behind only Chamberlain's 100. Bryant scored at least 50 points 24 times in his career, which is third in league history behind Jordan (31) and Chamberlain (118); six times Bryant scored at least 60. He was just the third player in NBA history to average 40 points in a calendar month, which Bryant accomplished four times. He was voted the league MVP in 2008 and led his team to the 2008 NBA Finals as the first seed in the Western Conference. In the 2008 Summer Olympics, Bryant won a gold medal as a member of the U.S. men's basketball team, occasionally referred to as "The Redeem Team". He won another gold medal at the 2012 Summer Olympics. Bryant led the Lakers to two more championships in 2009 and 2010, winning the Finals MVP award on both occasions.
Bryant was an 18-time All-Star, which ranks third behind only Kareem Abdul-Jabbar's 19 and LeBron James' 22. Bryant was chosen a then-record 18 straight times, each time as a starter. On four occasions (2003, 2011, 2013, 2016), he was the leading vote-getter. Bryant was named the All-Star MVP four times, a record he shares with Bob Pettit. Bryant was selected to the All-NBA Team on 15 occasions, tied for the most with Abdul-Jabbar and Tim Duncan, and his 11 first-team honors are tied for the second-most with Karl Malone. Bryant was also a 12-time All-Defensive Team selection, trailing only Duncan's 15, and Bryant was named to the All-Defensive First Team nine times, tied with Jordan, Garnett, and Gary Payton for the most all time. He was the first guard to play 20 seasons in the NBA. Bryant also won the NBA Slam Dunk Contest in 1997 and was its youngest winner. In his career, Bryant scored 40-plus points in 121 games, and he recorded a triple-double 21 times.
During the 2020 NBA playoffs, the Lakers' players wore 'Black Mamba' jerseys in honor of Bryant. Designed by Bryant himself, the black jersey features a snakeskin pattern with yellow accents and 16 stars representing the team's 16 championships at the time. In a Game 2 victory over the Denver Nuggets in the Western Conference Finals, Anthony Davis made a buzzer-beating three-pointer and yelled Bryant's name, while the team was wearing the 'Black Mamba' jerseys. Following a Game 2 victory in the 2020 NBA Finals, LeBron James was asked about the jerseys and had this to say: "It's always special to represent someone that meant so much, not only to the game but also to the Lakers organization for 20-plus years. For us to honor him, being on the floor, this is what it's all about."
On January 26, 2022, coinciding with the second anniversary of his death, a statue of Bryant and his daughter Gianna was placed at the crash site in Calabasas. Later in February, the NBA redesigned the All-Star Game MVP trophy as part of the major redesign of the All-Star Weekend trophies in celebration of the league's 75th anniversary season.
On Kobe Bryant Day, August 24, in 2023, the Lakers stated that Bryant's statue outside of Crypto.com Arena would be unveiled on February 8, 2024, to honor his two numbers with the Lakers, 8 and 24, and 2 for the number of his daughter Gianna. The inspiration for the statue, based on an image of Bryant after his 81-point game, pointing a finger toward the sky, was requested by Bryant himself before his death. On August 2, 2024, the Lakers also unveiled a statue of Kobe and Gianna Bryant outside of Crypto.com Arena.

See also
Notes
References
Further reading
McGrath, Ben (March 31, 2014). "The fourth quarter : Kobe Bryant confronts a long—and possibly painful—goodbye". The Sporting Scene. The New Yorker. Vol. 90, no. 6. pp. 38–49. Retrieved May 16, 2018.

External links

Career statistics from NBA.com · Basketball Reference
Official website 
Kobe Bryant at IMDb