Draymond Green’s Role in Golden State’s Success
Nic Carpino
The Santa Clara

The Draymond Green-Steph Curry connection is everything Warriors need

Draymond Green is no longer the same player he once was, yet he remains the Golden State Warriors’ most important player. This is largely due to the fact that, while his shot-making and scoring abilities have dramatically declined, his playmaking has never been better.   

Stephen Curry will be the Warriors’ lone All-Star representative this year and is undoubtedly the team’s best player. Curry’s brilliance has led Golden State to a playoff spot so far, but Green’s elite defense and leadership will dictate how successful Golden State will be this season.

Green’s stats on paper this season are sore on the eye. He is a three-time All-Star and three-time National Basketball Association (NBA) Champion with the Warriors, but he is past his “prime” athleticism. The player who once averaged 14-points per game and shot nearly 40% from three-point range will not return. Green now averages a mere 5.2 points on a career-low three-point percentage. 

Out of players with at least 100 shot attempts this year, only one player (Josh Okogie with -20.3) has underperformed his shot expectancy more than Green’s -17.9 rating. Green’s shotmaking skills are undeniably worsening. So, how is he still an impactful player for Golden State?

Green is an anomaly. He does not need to force his offense or shoot the ball to positively impact the game. Green’s playmaking reached new heights this year, as the power forward evolved into an elite facilitator. Career-highs in assists per game (8.3) and assist rate (12.8%) is integrating new players and freeing Steph in the Warriors Curry-centric offense.

Curry plays much more effectively with Green on the court, who helps grow Curry’s shooting percentages. Steph is a different player without Green. Without his longtime teammate on the floor this season, Curry’s usage rose, yet his shot efficiency decreased. Curry’s 3-point shooting percentage without Green (33%) has been 10% lower than Steph’s career average from deep.

Even though Green does not fill up the stat sheet, he is still extremely valuable to the ‘Dubs offense. His presence increases the Warriors’ net rating by 8-points every 100 possessions, a rating more than double the NBA’s second highest scorer in Curry (3.7). 

It is evident that Draymond Green’s style of play has changed. Even at just 30 years old, Green’s ailments are piling up. He tested positive for COVID-19 during training camp and an injured foot kept him out of the Warriors’ season opening games. 

Nevertheless, Green’s value remains paramount to Golden State’s success. It is often hard to quantify his intangible impact, but his high-caliber facilitating is evident. 

The Warriors may not be the same team they were during their championship dynasty, but no one will be looking forward to a date with Green, Curry and the Warriors come playoff time. 
