Former NBA player fires back at Draymond Green: ‘Luckiest basketball player ever’
Adam Zagoria
Yahoo Sports

Former NBA player Austin Rivers fired back in his verbal war with Draymond Green, calling him the “luckiest basketball player ever.”

The back-and-forth began when Green, a four-time NBA champion with the Golden State Warriors, took aim at his coach, Steve Kerr, for supposedly holding him back offensively.

“As much as he’s done for me in basketball, a part of me thinks he’s hindered me in my career and what I could have become,” Green said in a recent episode of “The Draymond Green Show.” “But what he’s also helped me become. Like you got to take the good with the bad, man.

“You know, when I think of who I was offensively as a player and who I became, I think a part of that is due to him. I don’t hold that against him. I’m forever grateful that he still put me in a position to be successful and that I could become Draymond Green despite my offensive role on our team.”

Appearing on "The Dan Patrick Show," Rivers countered that Green benefited from playing for Kerr on the Warriors.

“You were the luckiest basketball player I think I’ve ever seen,” Rivers said. “You were drafted to a franchise with a Hall of Fame front office, Hall of Fame coach, the greatest shooter of all time and perhaps a top five player of all time. Not to mention one of the most lethal scorers of all time and arguably a top 10 player of all time, Kevin Durant, the same guy you chased off because you talk too much. Steve Kerr made your career. How dare you?”

Green then proceeded to mock Rivers’ basketball career, essentially saying he peaked in high school.

“I just find it interesting that a guy who was the 10th pick in my draft, I was 35, who’s on his second act, I’m still on act one, would say such things,” Green said on “The Draymond Green Show”. “He goes, ‘Draymond’s never been a scorer.’ Well, Austin, you and I averaged the same amount of points in high school when you were a scorer. … And I say high school because that’s when you were at your best.”

Rivers, now an analyst with NBC Sports, was a five-star recruit and the No. 3 ranked high school player in the Class of 2011, per ESPN and 247 Sports.

Green, who was ranked 36th by ESPN in 2008, countered by calling into question Rivers’ journeyman 11-year NBA career.

“I only want to speak about Austin at his best because NBA careers, like should he really talk about my NBA career?” Green said. “I don’t know that that’s the case. I’m still with my first team. He was gone from his first team in two years.”

Green also poked fun at Rivers for playing for his father Doc Rivers with the L.A. Clippers.

“Everything isn’t something you should speak on,” Green said. “Rivers received the biggest bailout in U.S. history prior to President Trump bailing out the airlines. I wish I could give my son $200 million if I was a coach. You were gone from your first team in two years while I’m still here.”

Rivers never signed a $200 million contract. He signed a 3-year, roughly $35.5 million extension with the Clippers in 2016.

Rivers then went back at Green for, among other things, punching former teammate Jordan Poole in 2022.

“We weren’t the same players in high school,” Rivers said. “I don’t care about our numbers being similar. I did it at the national level, the top level, hence why I got the Naismith Award and I got pretty much every award you could think of in high school. I was ranked No. 1. You were ranked I don’t know. Cut it out.”

He added: “You were the luckiest basketball player I think I’ve ever seen. You were drafted to a franchise with a Hall of Fame front office, Hall of Fame coach, the greatest shooter of all-time and perhaps a top-five player of all time … not to mention one of the most lethal scorers of all time and arguably a top-10 player of all time, Kevin Durant, the same guy you chased off because you talk too much."

Stay tuned to this beef, as it’s probably not finished.
